Deprived urban areas
on the edges of large cities:
in Belgium, France,
Great Britain.
Middle-class cities:
in Denmark and Germany.
These very different areas
have one thing in common:
for 30 years, their names have been
listed on the maps of an
ultra-minority, but continually
expanding Islamic ideology:
jihadism.
The first to preach
100% European terrorism,
this totalitarian ideology has led
to more and more deadly projects.
We're going to kill all Americans!
Since 2001,
150 attacks have been carried
out on the Old Continent,
to which countless victims in
Muslim countries can be added.
From the end of the '80s,
a handful of ideologists from
the Middle East settled in Europe
and propagated jihadist thinking.
Following their steps means tracing
the origins of a political project
which European democracies have
had difficulty understanding.
In November 1989, no one
cared about the jihadist phenomenon.
The word couldn't even be found
in dictionaries yet.
Eyes were turned towards Berlin
and the shameful wall
that people were knocking down
with hammers and shouts of liberty.
I was rooted in the emotion
of the moment
because my father was German,
so for me, it was
a triumph of humanity.
It was the triumph of people.
People power.
And it dawned on me at that moment
that one of the reasons this was
happening was because the Russians
and the Soviets are withdrawing.
Of course, Afghanistan was
happening at the same time,
so in other words,
1989 wasn't just about Europe.
During previous months, the Soviet
troops pulled out of Afghanistan,
hastening the end
of the Cold War in their rout.
In the face of this defeated army,
Western regimes dreamt of the
victory of their democratic model.
They didn't see the other half
of the scenario:
The jihadist movement was born
in the gaps of this Afghan conflict.
Its story had begun
10 years before.
In 1979, Soviet troops
entered Kabul,
the capital of Afghanistan.
The Russians wanted to impose
a communist regime.
THE AFGHAN CRISIS
FROM REBELLION TO RESISTANCE
Afghan resistance organised itself
against them,
simple peasants, young students and
former soldiers took up arms.
Abroad, acts of war by these
ill-equipped Mujaheddin
affronting one of the most powerful
armies in the world resonated.
Thousands in Arab countries
wanted to join the Afghan front.
One man participated
in their mobilisation
and played a central role in the
emergence of the jihadist movement:
Abdallah Azzam,
a Jordanian of Palestinian origin.
This doctor in Quranic law was
close to the Muslim Brotherhood,
a vast Islamic political movement,
very influential in the Arab world.
His charisma and violent preaching
against Israel and the West
had forced him into exile.
When the Soviet troops
entered Kabul,
he spoke to the Muslim world.
I was a university professor.
I lived just next to Mecca,
but God knows
how I prefer these assemblies
to years of living
in Mecca.
Abdallah Azzam is in many ways
the father of the modern jihad.
His writings and his lectures
really laid out the principles
that was the duty of every Muslim
to engage in jihad war against
foreign armies invading Islam
and he put at the top of that list
Israel and the Palestinians.
But the target that was
available was
the Soviet Union in Afghanistan.
He said:
"Don't listen to the leaders.
Don't listen to your local imam.
Don't listen to your parents.
They're going to tell you that you
should wait or leave it in the hands
of officials, but don't listen
to them. Just go.
And God will punish you, in fact,
if you don't go and he will reward
you handsomely if you do."
The Islamist intellectual became
a link between the Afghan Mujaheddin
and their international support.
From Peshawar, a Pakistani city
on the Afghan border,
from 1984 he organised the reception
of former foreign soldiers,
now known as "Arab Afghans".
The first thing he did was
to set up an infrastructure
to help people find their way
and to help people get settled
in Peshawar,
and he set up the so-called
Services Bureau.
The Services Bureau in Peshawar:
a legendary name
for today's jihadists.
Algerian Abdullah Anas was one of
the first to walk through its door.
At 23, he became Abdallah Azzam's
right-hand man,
even marrying his daughter.
The Services Bureau wants you
to know how can you help
in Afghanistan,
whether you are a doctor,
you are a teacher,
you are a driver, you are a chef
to cook,
you are mullah, you are
"aâlem", you are scholar,
whatever you are...
Just give what you have to
Afghanistan, to the Afghani people.
Most of them
never crossed the border.
They just came and stayed
for a while and
absorbed Abdullah Azzam's message.
He wanted them to be
indoctrinated with
the philosophy of the jihad
that he was promoting, and
this gave him the perfect venue
for doing that.
The Services Bureau saw
a stream of those who,
a decade later,
would become the faces of
international terrorism,
like this Saudi man, son of a rich
family of entrepreneurial builders,
Osama bin Laden.
Osama bin Laden
joined the Services Bureau
after it was established,
one year after that.
So, he used to give, I think,
5 to 10,000 dollars every month
for Sheikh Abdullah Azam
to run the guest house.
In the middle of the '80s,
American President Ronald Reagan
armed the Afghan Mujaheddin,
in the name of the right against
communism.
He wasn't worried about these
radical Islamists supporting him.
Abdallah Azzam then travelled to
the United States every two years,
travelling freely
and preaching jihad,
like in this Brooklyn mosque.
Our speaker today is
Sheikh Abdallah Azzam.
Whoever wants to carry out jihad
in the way of Allah,
should join him.
Abdallah Azzam himself
legitimised attacks
on Jewish targets in America.
The word jihad means
"fight in the way of God."
It comes down to their being
viewed as just a minor phenomenon
and perhaps also people not really
reading what they were writing
or listening to what they were
saying, because
if they had,
they would have noticed
the seeds of future trouble.
All the unbelievers control us:
the Americans, the English...
And behind them, the hands
of world Judaism,
with its money, its women
and its media.
Muslims coming to the United States
to raise money for causes was
not something the FBI monitored.
He wanted to raise money
for a war that
we were already paying for.
So all the better! If someone
else wants to pay for it,
it saves
the American taxpayer money.
In Europe too, Abdallah Azzam's
radical thinking was appearing.
His magazine Al Jihad was
distributed in London,
Paris, Copenhagen and Brussels.
It was discovered that these people
had an official office in Belgium
with a number in the phone book
on one of the largest avenues in
Brussels, Avenue de Tervueren,
and there was a lot of fund-raising
for these people.
Somewhere, it's true
that it's a little intriguing,
as these people are, how shall I put
it, a sort of religious peculiarity.
They were helped by the Americans,
so they couldn't be as bad as that,
but we realised that they weren't
from here.
But we didn't see that this
could lead to problems later on.
No one knows how many Europeans
responded to
the Afghan jihad call in the '80s.
Several dozen, more or less.
Usama Hasam is one of them.
He grew up in a working class
district in East London.
From a line of renowned imams,
he memorised the Quran
at the age of 11.
He had just entered a prestigious
English university
and made use of a family visit to
Pakistan to join the Afghan front.
My grandad and uncles were delighted
that their nephew or grandson from
London was coming for jihad.
My uncle even said: "You know,
you're an example to us.
We're sitting here next door
to the jihad and we've
not taken part."
Usually the mujaheddin, you would
have to do six months' training
before they allowed you anywhere
near the front line.
They had a proper system
of training.
But to see three men
with long beards
come from London,
knowing the Quran...
And they let us. They gave us
special permission. They liked us
a lot, so we spent 24 hours
on the front line,
just one day and one night.
On his return to London, Usama was
welcomed as a hero by his family.
Many wanted
to hear his story, no matter
if he had only spent a short time
on the front.
The vast majority of what we call
the Afghan Arabs
were there
to get their picture taken,
but the realities of what they did
on the ground
are much less important than
the mythology that they developed,
which was that they defeated
the Soviet Union,
that foreign fighters were
the decisive tipping point.
That's all untrue.
In Peshawar, in 1987,
the first ideological differences
appeared among
Abdallah Azzam's disciples.
Osama bin Laden wanted to take
jihad to an international level.
And then suddenly,
one day he decided:
"I'm not going to spend a penny
for the Services Bureau.
I'm going to establish my own
guest house, my own training camp.
We should form a small unit
to fight outside of Afghanistan".
And then we saw at the end
where it led.
As a result of this split,
the Al Qaeda organisation
was created.
In 1989,
while the Soviet troops were
leaving Afghanistan,
Abdallah Azzam,
father of the jihad,
was killed by a car bomb
in Peshawar.
For his son-in-law Abdallah Anas,
a page had turned.
He left Pakistan for a long journey
which took him to London.
From the beginning, we said:
"Come on. We came to Afghanistan
to help the Afghans
just to kick out the Red Army.
When that is finished,
so jihad is finished."
This point of view was not greeted
unanimously by the Afghan Arabs.
Some wanted to continue the jihad,
freeing other Muslim countries.
KABUL, AFGHANISTAN
A conflict in the heart of Europe
gave them the opportunity.
SARAJEVO, BOSNIA
The multi-faith state
of Bosnia-Herzegovina
had been caught up in a civil war
since the explosion of Yugoslavia.
BOSNIA IS HELL
Sarajevo, its capital,
had become the symbol of a majority
Muslim population
trapped by a Christian
Serbian militia.
For some Afghan Arabs,
a new jihad had begun.
They wanted to help these
ill-equipped Muslim fighters
who were resisting as well
as they could,
especially as in the Serbian zone,
Bosnian Muslims had been
herded into camps
where they were
starved and tortured,
the first suspicion
of ethnic cleansing.
The Afghan Arabs
mobilised themselves
and arrived in Bosnia, from where
they reached the town of Zenica.
From the month of August 1992,
they appeared
in combat uniform,
weapons in their hands.
They started to incite
people to join the fight.
They declared that they had
come to defend
Bosnia-Herzegovina and
to save their Muslim brothers.
At the beginning, the people
found them very nice.
These men were welcomed
with open arms
by the Bosnian president,
Alija Izetbegović.
They were considered to be
experienced soldiers
and were incorporated
into the Bosnian army.
Attention! At ease!
JIHAD
Bosnia was the subject of extra-
ordinary jihadist propaganda
broadcast via video cassette.
The mountains were liberated
and the mujaheddin
continued advancing
until they reached
some difficult territory.
The fighting continued from morning
until the time of Asr prayer.
The Afghan Arabs
had a society project:
to set up an Islamic state
in Bosnia.
In remote villages,
they imposed Sharia law.
In Bosnia, Sharia law
and strict Islamic rules
were not followed.
People respected custom:
they went to the mosque,
some did Ramadan,
but no one worried about clothing
or rules regarding prayer or
that kind of thing.
Personally, I had
worries about that.
My wife dressed as a European.
And as they knew very well
that I was commanding
one of the largest brigades
in the territory,
one day they threw eggs at us,
at my wife and I,
because she was wearing European
clothes and we were holding hands.
Cohabitation with the Bosnian army
went badly.
In 1993, the Afghan Arabs
obtained the creation
of an independent brigade:
the "El Mujaheddin" brigade.
It set up camp
in the Serbian zone.
In this valley,
where the fighting raged,
the jihadists committed terrible
atrocities against the Serbs,
whether civil or military.
I was in the Serbian
Republican Army,
leading one of the brigades
that was attacked
by the El Mujaheddin unit.
I'm going to tell you something:
When they take a Serbian soldier
in the trenches,
they cut off his head and
set it next to the body...
In your opinion,
what does the soldier's comrade
feel seeing
his colleague's decapitated head?
It's particularly atrocious.
We had never seen that.
EL MUJAHEDDIN, 1993
Atrocious scenes,
meticulously filmed.
In the brigade's camp,
more than 50 soldiers and
civilians were executed,
their heads decapitated and
brandished like trophies.
The Mujaheddin even played football
with one of them.
The Mujaheddin played football
with the brothers in the army.
It was a game full of love
and friendship in the name of Allah,
with no hatred or bad feeling.
These atrocities went unnoticed
among the mass crimes
committed by the Serb units.
In Srebrenica, under the gaze of
the Blue Berets,
the Serbs separated the women
and children from the men.
The men were taken away
and massacred.
This massacre
of more than 8000 Muslims
set international opinion
in turmoil.
In Europe, radical Islamist groups
took advantage of it
to instrumentalise the anger
of young Muslims.
There were talks
and presentations every week.
I went to one
in South London, a mosque. A friend
of mine from our movement who had
been to Bosnia and come back and
he showed this graphic video
including Bosnian Muslims being
slaughtered, a baby being strangled.
At this time, Usama
was preaching jihad
to students in Great Britain.
At the end of a meeting,
a man challenged him.
He came up to me afterwards
and he said:
"That was all very good, but
what about the reality of Bosnia?
Muslims are dying.
What are we doing to support them?"
And I said to him: "Well,
if you really want to help, you can
go and fight there."
And he said: "Really?"
I said: "Yeah, jihad."
And he said:
"What? It's possible to go for jihad
in Bosnia?" and I said: "Yeah."
He said: "Who do I contact?"
I gave him two names.
I come from South London.
I'm 21 years old.
I'm a third year medical student
in Birmingham University,
and I live in Golders Green, London.
If you want to see true people,
true Muslims with unity,
you need to come to this place.
Every time I'm in Britain,
I go to study circles,
I go to lectures, I go to talks and
I feel in my heart that something
is empty.
I watched the TV and tears roll
down my face when
I see the Muslims in Bosnia,
Muslims in Palestine.
And then I come here and you feel
a sense of satisfaction.
You feel that you are fulfilling
your duty.
Great Britain apparently supplied
one of the largest contingents of
fighters in Bosnia,
a phenomenon
which surprised no one.
In the middle of the '90s,
jihadist ideology had already
spread to the London working class
through a handful
of radical preachers.
These activists, threatened
in their home countries,
had obtained a right of asylum,
just like thousands
of political opponents in Europe.
Contrary to the latter,
they advocated jihad
in the British capital,
to the point of earning it
the nickname of "Londonistan".
London in the late 1990s
and early 2000s became
a hub of activity for jihadists.
They found a safe haven here.
They found a way in which
they could propagate their ideas,
find money
and support
the wider Islamic movement.
And the British government
in the 1990s
had a very tolerant attitude
about this.
As long as you didn't
get very specific
about the kind of violence
you wanted to carry out,
the British
basically let you do it.
I don't think it was a strategy.
I think it was a miscalculation.
The English branch of Hizb Ut
tahrir, an Islamist organisation,
counted thousands
of British Muslims itself alone.
Its plan was to re-establish
the Khalifat
and impose Sharia law
in the Arab world.
Its leaders denounced
the Western way of life,
its democratic principles,
and spread anti-Jewish, misogynistic
and homophobic rhetoric
which did not move many people
in the United Kingdom.
In Iran, since 1980, over 4000
lesbians and gay men have
been executed
by the Islamic authorities.
Hizb Ut-tahrir led a field campaign
at universities
and even at public schools.
This was how Rashad Ali,
then a young schoolboy of 14,
first met members of
the organisation among his teachers.
They shook everything I believed in
and they reshaped it new.
RASHAD ALI
FORMER HIZB UT-TAHRIR EXECUTIVE
So, I now no longer knew what
religion was.
It wasn't just something
in the background.
to do with my religious faith.
It was an ideology.
It is an ideology
that's totalitarian.
It was revolutionary and aimed
at changing the entire world
and I was part of that.
The founder of the English branch of
Hizb ut-tahrir was Omar Bakri,
a Syrian Islamist opponent
living in London as a refugee
since the 1980s.
He has been part of the European
jihadist scene up to today.
In 1996,
Omar Bakri broke away from Hizb Ut-
tahrir, which he found too moderate.
He created his own organisation,
Al-Muhajiroun.
He wanted to establish an Islamic
state in the heart of Europe.
Omar Bakri is often quoted as saying
he wanted to see the black flag
of Islam flying over Downing Street.
One day, Islamic State is going to
be established in a Muslim country,
maybe in Europe, maybe in France,
maybe in Britain, God knows,
And if it's established outside,
it's got to conquer.
The idea that a khalifat is
the only solution for Muslims,
I think it's just nonsense now.
But at the time, I believed it.
It was a very interesting,
radical political idea.
Another view that the only
solution is armed jihad, right?
This was crazy and violent,
but it had a certain appeal.
This radical rhetoric
attracted new followers.
Abu Hamza al Masri, a former
nightclub bouncer,
became a recognised figure
of Londonistan.
Abu Hamza was rising in that
community as a spokesperson
for the anger of many young men
who had found themselves unemployed,
who had found themselves
alienated from British society.
It wasn't, you know,
highfalutin language.
It was like: "I'll come and sock
them. We'll show them who's boss."
So he wasn't frightened and had no
fear of saying controversial things.
In fact, he thrived
on being controversial.
Nicknamed "Captain Hook"
owing to the hand he lost
making an explosive device
in Pakistan,
Abu Hamza passed himself off as a
veteran, back from the Afghan front.
When I came to London,
I was surprised the way some people
were trying to put themselves
in the journey of jihad
in order to to recruit, to influence
some young Muslims
in Britain,
because as far as you say,
"Jihad, Afghanistan,
Abdullah Azzam",
automatically people will come
around you because
of the influence of the jihad
of Afghanistan.
So, I was surprised. Some names,
they were not in Afghanistan!
Abu Hamza took control of
a mosque in Finsbury Park,
in northern London.
This religious building became the
meeting point for nascent groups.
It was a safe place
and it was safe in the sense that
the public authorities didn't care
about what was going on there.
They kind of had half an eye on it,
but they thought
it was all a bunch of jokers.
And in any case,
joker number one, Abu Hamza,
they could deal with.
In Great Britain and
many European countries,
the Londonistan ideologists were
not yet considered a threat,
but for the French people,
25 July 1995
was a brutal wake-up call.
A deadly attack
this afternoon in the heart of Paris
at Saint-Michel RER station.
First reports of four dead
and 40 wounded, 16 seriously.
At 5.30 this afternoon, an explosion
and total darkness,
screams of horror,
mutilated bodies...
I was driving a car and stopped
at the side of the road
because I knew who had struck
and that it was only
the beginning.
We understood very quickly
that it was the GIA,
but we didn't know much about
this new form of terrorism,
and its religious fundamentalism
was difficult for us to understand.
We were confronted
by something quite new.
ALGIERS, ALGERIA
This attack was an indirect
consequence of Algerian civil war.
In 1991,
the Islamic Salvation Front won
the first round of the elections.
Its programme was to establish an
Islamic government in the country.
The government interrupted
the electoral process by force.
A radical group founded
by Afghan veterans
took up arms and created
the jihadist organisation GIA.
They wreaked havoc among
the civilian population,
wanted to overthrow
the Algerian regime
and hit out at the former
colonial power, France.
The French had to be punished
in the same way
as the Algerian authorities,
in the minds of the jihadists
at that time,
because the Algerian government only
held on thanks to the French state.
At the time, David Vallat was
a committed jihadist
who supplied the GIA with weapons.
He decided to leave
the organisation, however,
when he uncovered
its projects in France.
After Saint-Michel station in Paris,
the GIA carried out
a series of attacks
throughout the summer of 1995,
until a bomb was set off earlier
than planned
in front of a Jewish school.
The explosion could have wreaked
havoc as children were going home.
One of the terrorists
was identified:
Kaled Kelkal, a young Frenchman
of Algerian origin.
Get out!
Watch out!
OK, we're good.
He was killed by the police,
the first French terrorist to die
for the jihadist cause.
The investigation
by two anti-terrorist judges,
Jean François Ricard
and Jean Louis Bruguière,
took them to London.
NEW SCOTLAND YARD
There were indeed
connections with London
which showed the transfer
of funds from London
allowing this action
to take place.
French investigators and journalists
discovered Londonistan
and its jihadist ideologies,
with Omar Bakri at the head.
Every weekend in London,
Islamists organise meetings.
That day, the tourist hub
Trafalgar Square was hosting them.
Algeria was the main topic,
the rhetoric violent and the
British police officers indifferent.
With the care of our support,
manifest us physically,
financially and verbally,
wherever you are.
Allah orders us to fight
those who fight us!
London had become
the European headquarters of the GIA
and its terrorist activities.
The GIA had delegated
to their English representatives
that anything done in their name
in Europe went through them.
So, they were like the managers of
jihadist administration in Europe.
I take no glory in that,
but, chronologically, we were,
my generation,
the first to have established jihad
as an international movement.
The Finsbury Park mosque
and its imam Abu Hamza,
the so-called "Captain Hook",
played a central role among
the Algerian jihadist groups.
Abu Hamza at that point
had aligned himself
with the GIA in Algeria.
The French security service started
to speak to the British
security services and say:
"Do you know
this guy is a menace?
What are you going to do about it?"
The British security services said:
"We're not going to do anything
about it, it's not our problem!"
I know there was
a certain amount of concern,
particularly on the part of
the French authorities and I know
Juge Brugière has expressed this
many times,
he was concerned that we weren't
being robust enough in London
in dealing with people he described
very clearly as terrorists,
but it wasn't clear at all
at that time that
they were actually committing any
terrorist offences in the UK,
nor that they posed a direct threat
to the British public.
The place of worship
awakened the curiosity of
journalist Kurt Barling.
When we filmed undercover
in Finsbury Park mosque
and we discovered
that there were young boys
watching what we called
"snuff videos",
jihadi videos where people
were being beheaded,
we were appalled.
How can this happen?
How can nobody
be taking this seriously?
You had wide scale theft
of credit cards
being used to churn money
and the money was ending up
going to the GIA in Algeria.
There were stolen goods
all over the mosque.
You know, It was...
it was bedlam.
We say, it was bedlam.
UNITED KINGDOM
In the 1990s,
Londonistan and its hate activities
were the most visible face of a
jihadist phenomenon found elsewhere.
NORWAY
SWEDEN
THE NETHERLANDS
DENMARK
Partisans established themselves
in Europe.
They took part in the birth of
a new generation of terrorists.
These individuals set up some
of the first jihadist networks
in Europe at the time.
We're talking about small numbers,
but in some cases, very charismatic
individuals,
which slowly attracted people
around them
and so started radicalising some
first or second-generation Muslims.
In Denmark, a handful of ideologists
thus broadcast a radical Islam
from the beginning of the 1990s.
Nothing predisposed this country
to become one of the strongholds
of European jihadism.
Denmark has no colonial history
in the Middle East,
it is on the margins
of its geopolitical issues
and its social model is touted
as one of the best in the world.
You had a situation in Denmark in
the '90s where it was very liberal
and you didn't have
these strict control systems
that you have today.
So, you had asylum seekers
coming in
basically without being investigated
before they came in.
It was in this context that
Abu Talal Al-Qasimi arrived,
an Egyptian of whom the Danish
authorities should have been wary.
His story is very closely linked
to one of the most violent pages
of Islamist terror in the 1980s.
CAIRO, EGYPT
6 OCTOBER 1981
It should have been a simple
military parade.
In the official box, Anwar el-Sadat,
the Egyptian president,
toppled under the bullets
from four army officers.
The assassins claimed to be from
a terrorist group seeking
to establish a khalifat in Egypt.
Abu Talal was part of the plan
to take Anwar el-Sadat
off power,
and it was his friends who
actually shot Anwar el-Sadat.
Abu Talal, like hundreds
of militant Islamists,
was arrested
by the Egyptian police.
During the trial, which began
in December 1982,
he can be seen here
alongside one of the major figures
of contemporary jihadism:
Omar Abdel Rahman,
nicknamed "The Blind Sheikh",
one of the leaders of the
Egyptian terrorist organisation.
During this lengthy trial,
which became
a forum for these fundamentalists,
one man was
already standing out:
Ayman Al-Zawahiri, bin Laden's
future right-hand man
and Al Qaeda's number two.
We believe in our religion both
as an ideology and practice and
hence we have
tried our best to establish
this Islamic state
and Islamic society.
In spite of his young age,
Abu Talal had already met
the most outstanding personalities
of the jihadist movement.
Freed, he went to
the Afghan-Pakistani border
where he met bin Laden.
He only stayed there a few months
at the beginning of the 1990s.
And he came to Denmark in 1993
and very quickly, he became
a central figure
also in the Islamic
extremist environment.
The Egyptian had understood the
media's importance for his ideas.
He filmed his conferences and
produced VHS cassettes.
He even managed to pull himself up
alongside some
representatives of
the Danish Muslim community.
He made these fear speeches
every Saturday at the mosque
where he called for jihad,
so he kind of had the influence,
dragging people
to the course of jihadism
in Denmark,
building the stones for generations
to come afterwards.
This little radical group even got
his former cell companion,
the blind sheikh Abdel Rahman,
to come on a tour of Denmark.
The blind sheikh
was really a rock star.
People came from all over
the country to greet him.
It was only afterwards that
it came to light
for the Danish intelligence
how crazy this was, that you had
this guy running around who could
freely speak about all this stuff
without any interference
and make these wild speeches
just months before
what we know happened.
Death and destruction beneath the
towers of the World Trade Centre.
A massive underground explosion
kills at least seven people,
injures 600 more and demolishes a
crowded path train station.
On 26 February 1993,
a car bomb containing
680 kilos of explosives
blew apart the car park of one
of the World Trade Centre towers.
The attack caused six deaths.
For the terrorists,
it was a failure:
The entire complex
should have collapsed.
The investigation led back
to an Islamist cell
organised around the blind sheikh
Abdel Rahman,
who had been living in New York
since obtaining political asylum.
NEW YORK
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
This jihadist attack highlighted
the terrorists' international
connections:
Iraq, Pakistan, Egypt, Jordan
and also Denmark.
The Americans strongly suspected
Abu Talal of having been aware
of a plan to attack
the World Trade Centre.
I talked to this wonderful FBI guy
who said: "Well, he knew of all
the plans. He was
the operative kind of guy,
number one in Europe."
While the Egyptian preacher was
travelling under a false name
to get to war-torn Bosnia,
he was taken by the CIA,
questioned, then supposedly
handed over
to the Egyptian authorities.
He disappeared. He never returned to
Denmark. He is assumed to be dead,
but I'm not a position where
I can share more information
about his whereabouts.
Eight years before 11 September,
the United States was already
targeted by European networks.
In Bosnia, the war
was coming to an end.
The Dayton Agreement signed
by the warring factions
spoke of foreign fighters:
they had to leave the country.
The Al mujaheddin brigade
was directly targeted.
The European jihadists
returned home
and among them were
several French fighters.
There were not many
who went to Bosnia,
but they are in touch.
They know each other. They knew
each other beforehand
and they are extremely determined,
unlike, for example, those
who went to Afghanistan.
They go to participate directly
in acts of extreme violence.
They are people who have a taste
for blood, for ultra-violent action.
In the winter of 1996,
some former Bosnian fighters wreaked
havoc in the north of France.
Armed with weapons of war,
they held up armoured vans,
killing for meagre spoils.
The police were able to locate
their hideout.
Hiding out in a building
in Roubaix,
four members of the group
refused to give themselves up.
They died when
the apartment caught fire.
The leaders of the group,
nicknamed the "Roubaix Gang",
were two former fighters from
the al Mujaheddin brigade:
Christophe Caze
and Lionel Dumont,
two young converts who had returned
from Bosnia.
They wanted to finance jihad
in other conflict zones.
Christophe Caze was shot
going over the Belgian border.
Lionel Dumont was finally
arrested in Bosnia,
the same place where
he had embraced jihad.
There are a certain number of
members of this group who have
gone to Turkey and Canada
to continue their action
in support of international jihad.
At that time,
these groups had already set up
extremely huge
international networks.
On 7 October 1998,
America was the target.
Simultaneous car bomb attacks
struck the American embassies
in Nairobi and Dar es Salam.
The United States
discovered a new enemy:
the Al Qaeda number one,
Osama bin Laden.
Abdallah Azzam's former pupil
had found refuge in Afghanistan
with the ultra-puritanical
Taliban regime.
It was from there
that Osama bin Laden
was preaching worldwide jihad.
They are waiting for you
to break the United States
and Israel.
Because Allah's land is vast
and their interests dominate it.
So, do what you can
to attack them so that
Allah's word lasts forever.
The United States was under
the Al Qaeda microscope.
What was particularly seductive
in this strategy,
in the end, was that almost
all jihadists
in the world could come together.
The number of recruits increased,
particularly among young people,
who saw that they could fight
the USA on their own territory.
In Londonistan,
Omar Bakri very quickly understood
the attraction of Al Qaeda.
Down, down USA!
USA, you will pay!
He was one of the first in Europe
to embrace Osama bin Laden's ideas.
Hands off Muslim lands!
At the end of the millennium,
jihadism was still misunderstood
and reduced to the rank of
recruiting groups
who entertain viewers in front
of their TV screen.
In spite of their media exposure,
the first jihadists were not
taken seriously.
Sheikh Omar Bakri, you have
applauded the terrorist
attacks on the American embassies
in Nairobi and Dar es Salaam.
Bin Laden, the man for whom you've
expressed this admiration,
said that all Americans
are legitimate targets.
That's not true. That is allegation
of the media and the West.
And if civilians get killed
in that bombing?
Nobody will accept an attack
on any civilians.
Do you see them as casualties
of war, then?
Of course, that happens.
They are casualties
of your holy war.
Please understand something.
Let's not mix nationalities
with religion.
Will you abide by these laws?
I don't care about the law.
I tell you the truth:
I care about Islamic law.
Omar Faroq, are these views
representative of Muslim Britain,
the Muslims in the Midlands, who
are watching this show tonight?
I think you can answer
that question yourself.
Today, you have invited some Muslims
to come and speak on this programme,
and it seems to me the Muslims you
always choose on these programmes
around the media always
happen to be the lunatic fringe
of the Islamic reform movement.
They do more damage
to the image of Islam
through their foolish, apathetic,
loose tongues
than the enemies of Islam can do.
I think they were perceived
predominantly
as polemicists, as campaigners,
but were they a physical threat
to the United Kingdom?
An ideological problem, perhaps?
But then, ideology in itself,
certainly at that time, was not
perceived as a direct threat.